Is this taping now? The tape is now on. Anything you say now will be recorded.
Mr. Simak, could you give us your background, where you grew up, how you spent
your time as a young boy? I was born on my grandfather's farm, which stood on
the high hills above the confluence of the Mississippi and Wisconsin River. And
I grew up as a farm boy. I went to a rural high school.
We lived and went about to the tail end of the pioneer period. Most of us are.
My family is poor, and all of our neighbors were poor. We didn't think we were
poor, but we were. We didn't think so because everybody was in the same shape.
And I did go to, after high
school, I attended the teacher's training course and taught school for a short
time. And then went to the University of Wisconsin at Madison, but I did not
finish there. I ran out of money. I got a job in the newspaper, and I've been in
the newspaper business ever since until six, seven years ago.
Okay. How did you decide to become a newspaper man?
I think there was no decision because I think I always knew what I wanted to
write.
And I never really thought of writing fiction or writing books or anything of
that sort. It seemed to me that the way to write was to be a newspaper man. My
mother, who was a very well-educated woman, had books in the house all the time,
and I read them.
And she used to sit at the table by the light of a kerosene lamp and read it
each evening after all the work was done. And I asked her at one time, I
remember, if a newspaper carried all the news, printed all the news that was.
And she, in the manner of that day, and because people were not as cynical then
as they are now, said, yes, that's true. And I asked her another question that I
thought was important. I said, is all the news true? Is what the newspaper
writes true? And again, with that lack of cynicism and faith that the people of
that time had, she said, yes, it was. And that decided me, decided me to be,
want to be a newspaper man. How long were you in the newspaper business before
you wrote your first science fiction stories? No, wait, that's going to take
some.
I started my newspaper career in 1929. And my first short story appeared in, I
think, 1931. And I wrote, at that time I wrote several other short stories which
were published. And at about that time the magazine, all magazines, the science
fiction magazines and all others, ran into hard times because the Great
Depression came along. And so I, there was no market, practically no market. So
I dropped out and didn't do any more writing, any other fiction writing of any
kind until I think it was 37 or 38. And I started writing again because the
magazines had come back. John Campbell had been named editor of Astounding. And I
felt very sure that I could sell my work to John Campbell. So I started in again.
And I think since, since 1938, 1939, I think it's 38, 37 or 38. There was only
one year in which none of my work appeared. There was one year that's blank. And
I can't remember which year that it was. And I have no idea why that occurred.
When you began writing fiction, what influenced you to write science fiction?
Well, because when I was a boy, I had read, Jules Verne and, and I think H.G.
Wells, although I don't actually remember any H.G. Wells works, but I must have
read them, Edgar Allan Poe and Haggard.
And I thought what a wonderful thing that was. I just had an awful interest in
the field. I wanted to read it myself and I found out when I decided that I
wanted to write. When I found out the newspaper didn't give me everything that I
wanted in the writing field. I decided that on the part that on my spare time I
write, I naturally seemed to turn to science fiction. Because it was something I
was acquainted with. I felt very sure that I could do the job of it. And I was
quite fortunate, of course, because there was no competition at that time. If
you could string three sentences together and make a paragraph, somebody would
buy the story.
Did you have any interest in science when you were growing up? Some interest.
You must realize that at that time, science was a somewhat different thing than
it is today. Today, science is something that a good many people are interested
in. There are a great many engineers and a great many technicians and just
ordinary lay people who are interested in science. At that time, science was a
rather elevated situation, elevated crap. There were a few great scientists.
There were a few engineers. But mostly those were either mining engineers or
civil engineers.
There have been very old science, very old pride at that time. And the public
interest in it was fairly low. I was taken by them. I used to read, I forget
what old magazine it was. It was a magazine. Would it be Scientific American?
Would it go back that far? I think so. I used to read Scientific American, which
had some marvelous articles in it, particularly on astronomy. I didn't
understand any of it, or understood very little of it. But the mystery and the
wonder of it caught me by the smoke. And that was the sort of interest I had at
that time in it. I don't think very many people had interest in science the way
that they can be said to have interest in science today.
You mentioned when you resumed your writing in 1938 when the magazines had
recovered that you thought you could write for John Campbell. What was in your
writing that you thought would appeal to Campbell? I've read a lot of John
Campbell's work.
I knew that John Campbell was favored
what we today call hard science fiction. And I thought that I could write that
kind of science fiction. I did write what amounted to hard science fiction for
some years, and then began to turn over to the softer science fiction such as
most of which... Well, most people write soft science fiction today. Only a few
of the old hands and maybe a few new beginners write the hard science fiction
today.
Some people feel that John Campbell influenced science fiction positively.
Others feel that he influenced it very negatively. What's your assessment of his
influence on the field? I think John Campbell probably made science fiction what
it is. He was the one man who stood there and fought for science fiction and
directed science fiction.
You can't take away from John Campbell anything good that has been said of him.
In later years we became rather hype bound with his opinion and a little big tutorial.
And he was a good influence to start with. I think that probably you can see was a bad
influence. But he lost his prestige as a great science fiction editor. I suppose quite a few years
before he died. There were some of the boys that were writing science fiction friends of
mine that posted that they could tell the science fiction story to Campbell anytime they wanted
because they knew exactly what buttons to push. And if they pushed the right button they knew
they'd jamboree the story. He was that predictable.
You stuck to short stories during your early years. Was this because you were full time
employed as a newspaper man?
Well not necessarily but a short story is the training ground for the novelist. You can
learn a lot more from writing a short story than you can writing a novel. It's shorter
to write, somewhat easier to write. You don't have the time invested in a short story to
write a novel. If you spend as a beginner probably six months or a year writing a novel
and it fails when that's catastrophic. But during that same time you could write perhaps
a dozen short stories and if only one of them sold why okay you have made a beginning. So
it's the path that most people take to becoming writers.
And that doesn't apply only to the science fiction field but
to any literature.
According to my information in 1944 the first two stories from City appeared. This seemed
like quite a leap from what I should have written in that it has the dogs and the robots and
the men. Could you give us a little bit of background on how you conceived the ideas and put them together
for that series?
It wasn't weak because I always regard the city stories as a sort of watershed in my writing. I have been
writing the early type of science fiction work up until then. And it seemed to me that something
better could be done than was being done. Strangely enough, at about the same time a number of other
people seemed to think the same thing. There's no accounting for something like that happening.
I think it was my disillusioned by the war that made me write the City series. It's a
terrible period in history. Much of human dignity has been shared away. It was not the kind of world that we had lived in
up until that time. I was far myself wanting to retreat from it. So I retreated from it in my
own mental way by going into another dimension, into another world, creating a sort of a fantasy
of myself as it turned out others also were able to find some refuge. I think if the City series
was written today that they probably would not get the attention that they got back in the early 40s.
I wrote them exactly the right type of stories, exactly the right type. Without knowing I was doing it.
The original eight stories, what kind of time span did they cover as far as your writing them?
I don't know, honestly can't tell you. There were eight altogether weren't there?
Yes, I have the first ones. The first seven were written very well one after the other. The eighth and
final one John Campbell turned down because he said he's not that he'd written that he'd published enough of that of the City series.
And so when he rejected it I simply threw it up on the shelf and figured it was one of my rejects.
And then later took it down and I think I sold it to amazing stories.
And I don't recall what they called it but they put it out as one of their horrible titles.
And then later on when it came out, it came out before my, it was, it was, it joined the others.
But it was the last one was not published by Campbell.
I want to jump up in the future now and then we'll go back. But I want to ask you about the ninth city story Epilogue which came out 20 or 30 years after the others.
What's the story behind this one coming out very late?
Well John Campbell died and of course all of us, all of us were taken by his death because even the comparatively young man and appeared to be in good physical condition.
Some of the writers reverenced him. I'm not too sure I reverenced him but I felt very kindly and very, very badly hit by his death.
And a group of the writers got together and said we'd have to put out a memorial to John Campbell.
And the best way would be to put out the last issue of the oldest telling stories, not analog but the oldest telling stories.
And so they asked, I suppose there were dozen or so people who had written for the oldest telling stories to write a story for the memorial wall.
And Harry Harrison who was the editor told me and he said, Cliff if you would write a story I wish you'd write another City story.
And I was reluctant to do that. I shied away because it had been quite a number of years since I'd written a City story.
And I knew that I had said I was a changed writer but I was not the same man as I was when I'd written the stories.
I worried a great deal about the propriety of writing another City story because I figured that the last one, the last eight had wound up the story of the Webster family and that there was no need going further.
But the more I thought about it the more I began to see that if I was going to write something for that memorial about volume it should be a City story.
So for the first time since I'd written them I took down my copy of the book City and reread it trying to catch the flavor and the spirit of the stories.
And when I read the stories I simply absolutely ached to rewrite them again because there are some awful crudities in them.
But I knew even as I thought about that that I couldn't do it because if I rewrote them they wouldn't be a City series.
So I sat down and did my best to try to recreate the flavor of the other eight stories.
I think I came very close to it but not as satisfactory as I'd wanted to.
Jenkins is the robot that comes to mind from that series.
Your robots differed from a lot of the early science fiction robots in that they were benevolent. They weren't evil beings.
How did this idea come to you as opposed to using evil robots?
According to Isaac, Isaac Asimov there can be no evil robot. He's got his three Robotics,
Robotics Laws. But I don't think there were too many evil robots. A few maybe but not too many.
But the thing was that most of the writers who had written robots before wrote of them as machines.
And I wrote of them as surrogate human beings.
I made them people with some of the biases and prejudices that the living human would have stripped away from them.
And I tried to make them the kind of people that I would want to live with.
To me, the robot was another person.
And the same thing is true with a lot of my aliens. They are people. They are other people. Other persons.
Had you been exposed to Asimov's three laws before you wrote the City series?
Yes. Asimov homogated the three laws quite a number of years before that.
In his earliest robot story he had the three laws.
I don't particularly hold those laws.
And I don't think a lot of other writers would help with the media because we do have miserable robots now occasionally in evil robots.
But by and large the writing fraternity went along with these three laws and your robot still held to the three laws that he had set forth.
There must have been another element from your life in the books because the city collection is dedicated to Scooty who was Nathaniel.
Was he a little dog that your family had?
Scooty was a Scottish carrier.
We lived with him. He didn't live with us. We lived with him for some 13 or 14 years. He was a great dog.
Now I want to jump into the 1950s. You produced a lot of short stories in the 1950s.
I'd like for you to comment on that. The continuing production of short stories as opposed to novels.
And then how was your newspaper career going in the 50s?
I came to Minneapolis. I worked for 10 years in the newspaper field in the small newspaper field with thousands of, tens of 20,000.
I came to Minneapolis in 1939. I came as a copy editor on the copy desk.
In the 1950s I was a news editor. I was responsible for the entire content of the newspaper with the exception of the sports department.
my career was going very well and I was by that time we had a family and I had a
responsibility a family a house a car and there was there was Maryland
City for writing then I suppose and there was and it had been in earlier years
the money was very welcome I was getting a good salary but a few thousand
dollars a year made an awful lot of difference in the family budget so it was
economic considerations I suppose that kept me writing although I was never
aware of that I always enjoyed writing I never thought of myself as writing for
money but I I did keep turning them out and I suppose at that time I was far
more ambitious than I was in later years and was very much very much trying to
become a decent writer
this is this is as good a place to ask this question as any aren't newspaper
writing and story writing almost on opposite ends of the spectrum as far as how
you approach the writing and how did you manage to juggle both both types that's
that's easy because they are absolutely upwards but I compartmentalize my my
life into two into two lives when I went to work in the morning I was a
newspaper man and when I came home and sat down at my desk at night I was a
fiction writer I I carried that as opposed to absolutely because I never
mentioned my writing at the office my outside writing my fiction writing at the
office and if somebody came and asked me about it I I talked to them about it as
briefly as I could because I wanted to keep the two lives absolutely separate
it was a matter it was a matter I suppose it was a matter of psychology it was a
matter of mental attitude because the danger was there and I realized there was
a danger I think however that that newspaper writing does not in any way harm
experience as a newspaper writer does not in any way harm the fiction writer
because in newspaper writing you do have to write concisely and plainly and so
and simply so that the reader will not only read it easily but will understand
it and I think that's important in fiction writing as well
these stories that were written in the 1950s were you I guess it can be said in
your maturity and various sources that I've read used the following words to
describe it gentle, sentimental, pastoral, warm, bucolic Midwestern values was
does this basically reflect your philosophy of life? well let's not talk about
philosophy of life for a moment let's talk about technique and craftsmanship um
every writer writes from his roots and my roots were in the Midwest and in the
rural areas I was I was also I I I'd always lived in the country or in a small
town and when we came to Minneapolis in 1939 we lived in the city only long
enough to find a home that we could buy in the country um I like Minneapolis I
began to think of Minneapolis as my city and I have still have a great deal of
fiction for it it's it's a it's a small town it's not a large city it is
it always says it seems to me it was an overgrown village uh people are friendly
I didn't know I didn't know that I went down Ruck Street during the noon hour
and I wouldn't go more than a couple blocks because before somebody would speak
to me my name maybe stop chat for a while it's a very friendly place and I liked
it but I didn't want to live in it um
I don't know about the
about the philosophy
the man's philosophy is it's so much a part of him that he probably doesn't stop
and think about it very often uh he doesn't say well this is I'm writing this
way because this is the way I think or this is the way I feel when you sit down
and write you're writing the way you think and you feel unconsciously without
without uh trying to work at it does that make any sense or am I just fumbling
around that sounds great to me that really does um in fact I this is just a
comment but I think it's those uh those adjectives that I use that that make
your writing very popular um it's it's nice that you feel that way um let me ask
a question now uh there are some writers and Ray Bradbury is the one that comes
to mind most who use this kind of midwestern uh scenery imagery as a as just a
veneer for something that's covering evil whereas your you very seldom have
somebody in your works that are really that somebody that's really evil um we
just don't see it that much do you do you just not worry about that or let the
other writers handle the evil things and you'll handle these more uh gentle
kinds of situations I have I have never I think I've never been aware of evil I
have been aware of friendship and love and um good fellowship and honesty truth
I uh get very concerned at times about the condition of the world not only now
but in times past and I know that there is evil but it's I I kept it as I am
blank not consciously but uh simply because I didn't want I guess I didn't want
to think about it I um I concentrated on as I said before on the things that
seemed important to me um once again I'm fumbling around I'm not doing a very
good job not not the kind of job you probably like but I I can't tell you I
can't tell you I can't tell you much more about it No, everybody that's
listening thinks uh this is quite interesting so you're you are not rambling um
we'll ask one more question then we'll run out of tape on this side then there
are just a few more questions um in the 1960s you began producing a lot of
novels uh did you find your stride as far as uh getting your reputation and uh
getting your foot in the door and then move to the novels or why did you decide
to make this move I didn't I didn't consciously decide to do it I simply simply
by by the by the natural progression of events I came to a point where I felt a
need to write novels or maybe felt that I was finally a good enough writer a
good enough classman to write a novel it it it uh came quite naturally.
I didn't strain to do it. I began to find
I think the best thing the best way to explain it is that I began to find that I
sat down and to write a novelette and it would turn into a novel it it it it was
just the way it worked um I didn't decide that I'd change from short stories to
novelettes now that I changed from the novelette to the noveline it was simply
the way it worked out and of course it was once I wrote a few novels I began to
see if that is where you could could make more money that there was more
economic work in the novel than there was in in a handful of short stories that
I had to do